= Welcome to TrackRecord v2.24

TrackRecord is a timesheet system written for the Ruby On Rails web
development framework. More information, including a link to the most recent
live source repository, is available at:

* http://trackrecord.pond.org.uk

This software is released under a BSD License. See the LICENSE file
for details along with:

* http://www.opensource.org/licenses/bsd-license.php

Technical documentation can be found by opening 'doc/app/index.html'
in your preferred web browser.


== Requirements, new installations and upgrades 

=== Requirements for all users

TrackRecord was developed upon and is optimised for the PostgreSQL database.
In particular its report generator will run fastest on this platform. Other
Rails-supported databases _should_ work, but only PostgreSQL has been tested
extensively under development. PostgreSQL 8.4 or later is required if using
that database engine.

* http://www.postgresql.org

The installation and upgrade guides below assume you are familiar with the
general procedure for installing Rails applications, with an environment set
up already for Ruby On Rails. If not, then I strong recommend you begin with
"RVM", the Ruby Version Manager:

* http://rvm.io

...and use this to establish a Ruby 1.9 installation. TrackRecord assumes
Ruby 1.9 patch level 392 or later. It is not tested on Ruby 2.0 and will not
work on Ruby 1.8.


=== Installation for new users

Download either a source archive from the Pond's Place web site (see above),
from GitHub directly, or glone the repository as per GitHub instructions.
Then:

[Make a secret key]

  Edit file +config/initializers/secret_token.rb+ as per the instructions in
  the file; comment out the +raise+ statement, uncomment the +secret_token+
  assignment underneath and type in or otherwise randomly generate a long
  token string. Running command +rake+ +secret+ is a good way to do this.

  <em><b>Never make your modified file public anywhere!</b></em> Keep it a
  secret always.

[Configure TrackRecord for your database]

  Copy a template database configuration file:

  [PostgreSQL 8.4 or later]
    +config/database_blank.yml+

  [SQLite 3]
    +config/database_sqlite.yml+

  [Other databases]
    Roll your own +config/database.yml+ file

  ...as file +config/database.yml+ and modify to suit your database
  configuration. You then need to say what database access gem you want to
  use. Edit file +Gemfile+ at the top level of the TrackRecord distribution:
  
  [PostgreSQL 8.4 or later]
    No changes are necessary

  [SQLite 3]
    Comment out the line "<tt>gem 'pg', '>=0.16'</tt>" and add underneath it
    the line "<tt>gem 'sqlite3'</tt>"

  [Other databases]
    Comment out the line "<tt>gem 'pg', '>=0.16'</tt>" and add underneath it
    "+gem+" line(s) specifying whatever is needed for your chosen database;
    you may need to do a web search to determine the required gem(s)

[Make sure you have all installed gems available]

  Issue the command +bundle+ +install+. This can be a bit fraught as Ruby
  and Rails gems can be finniky things, especially database adapter gems;
  these often need native components compiling which in turn require a
  working native compiler and supporting files on your system. If you get
  an error, try doing a web search for it as often the answer can be found
  there. If all else fails see http://trackrecord.pond.org.uk for contact
  details.

[Finally, set up your database]

  Issue the following commands to set up all database structures. These
  assume a Unix-like environment. Windows users will need to adapt them.

    rake db:create:all
    RAILS_ENV=production rake db:migrate
    RAILS_ENV=development rake db:migrate

  If you get an error, it's likely that your database configuration isn't
  correct - check the steps above are OK.

[Check it works in development mode]

  Depending on where you're deploying, you may have wider web server issues
  to consider. For a local machine, you can test with the Rails built in web
  server:

  * <tt>rails s</tt>
  * Visit http://localhost:3000 in your web browser

  This will test the server in development mode, so changes made here will
  not affect your production environment database unless you configured them
  to be the same in +config/database.yml+.

[Possibly 'precompile assets' for production mode]

  Asset precompilation is rather convoluted Rails-ism aimed at performance
  improvements in production mode. If you run a production server you may
  already be familiar with this and have made your own environment settings
  inside +config/environments/production.rb+, but in any case it is likely
  that you will have to issue this command:

    RAILS_ENV=production bundle exec rake assets:precompile
    
  For more, please see http://guides.rubyonrails.org/asset_pipeline.html
  and section "Notes on asset precompilation" below.

[Running formal tests]

  To make sure your database is suitable for TrackRecord, run the tests with
  the command "<tt>rake test</tt>". This will take a long time to complete.
  No test failures are expected.

[Optional configuration]

  You may want to look at files +config/initializers/email_config.rb+ and
  +config/initializers/general_config.rb+ once you've verified that the
  software is running, to see what other things can be changed. In general,
  the other files in +config/initializers+ should not be modified.


=== Upgrading for existing users

==== Upgrading from version 1.x

If you are updating from a version earlier than v2.0, please see the
+CHANGELOG+ file's information about v2.0 for details as this is a major
update from Rails 2 to Rails 3.


==== Upgrading from version 2.00 to 2.11 inclusive

You will need to update +config/production.rb+ with a path prefix if you
deploy in a subdirectory rather than you server's document root. This step
is required because of a very long standing Rails bug.

See the comments above the "config.relative_url_root" line for details. 
This is vital for anyone running TrackRecord in a non-root location,
<em>even if you use something like Phusion Passenger and normally expect to
need no such configuration changes.</em>

* http://www.phusionpassenger.com

You must then also follow the steps shown in the next section.


==== Upgrading for all version 2.00 or later users

Otherwise, whenever you update a version 2.x installation, please do the
following things:

[Make sure gems are up to date]

  (Re-)issue command +bundle+ +install+ (then optionally, +bundle+
  +update+).

[Make sure your databases are up to date]

  Issue the following commands to update all database structures. These
  assume a Unix-like environment. Windows users will need to adapt them.

    RAILS_ENV=production rake db:migrate
    RAILS_ENV=development rake db:migrate

[Possibly recompile assets for production mode]

  TrackRecord as a Rails 3 application requires asset precompilation for
  production mode, unless you changed +config/environments/production.rb+ so
  that this wasn't needed. A new release of TrackRecord means updated assets
  so you need to issue:

    RAILS_ENV=production rake assets:clean
    RAILS_ENV=production bundle exec rake assets:precompile
    
  For more, please see http://guides.rubyonrails.org/asset_pipeline.html
  and section "Notes on asset precompilation" below.

[Re-run the formal tests]

  To make sure your database is still suitable for TrackRecord, it is
  advisable (though not strictly necessary) to re-run the formal tests with
  the command "<tt>rake test</tt>". This will take a long time to complete.
  No test failures are expected.


=== Notes on asset precompilation

==== Deploying in a subdirectory

Rails asset precompilation is somewhat broken in that it doesn't understand
applications deployed into subdirectories. If you are not using Heroku, you
can fix this by adding the following into config/environments/production.rb:

  config.assets.initialize_on_precompile = true
  config.relative_url_root = '/<your-app-subdir>'

...then precompile the assets. If already compiled, delete the folder
'public/assets' then precompile again (see earlier for the command).


==== Deploying on Heroku

On Heroku, the 'initialize' flag must be 'false'. The following link may
provide some insight about what to do:

  https://github.com/rails/rails/issues/8941

I apologise for the inconvenience, but I can't do much about a bug like
this that's been in Rails for at least two years, especially now that (at
the time of writing) Rails 4 is out so a Rails 3 fix is even more unlikely.


== Running and usage

=== First time setup

The first time you use TrackRecord you'll be asked to provide an Open ID
for the person that'll become the first system administrator. More details
about OpenID are provided on the welcome page.

=== Adding other users

To add new users to the system:

* The new user tells the admin what their preferred Open ID is
* The admin uses the "Manage users" link on their Home page control panel
  to add a new User entry with the required permissions and Open ID set
* The admin tells the new user that they're set up
* The new user can now log in

Only permitted Open IDs added by an administrator in this way will be able
to sign into the system.

=== Customers, projects and tasks

A customer has many projects and a project has many tasks. Only admins are
able to create any of these entities.

==== Adding one at a time

When adding new customers etc. to the system, start with the customer,
then add the projects, then add the tasks. Always take care to assign the
correct task->project->customer ownership; you don't _have_ to assign a
task to a project, for example, but users can't add that task to a row in
their timesheet unti you do.

==== Bulk task import

It is possible to import tasks en masse from XML files exported by software
such as OpenProj or Microsoft Project. Use the "Bulk task import" link from
the Home page control panel and follow the instructions presented.

If your workflow is based around creating project plans before setting up
the timesheet system, this can be really useful as the project plan may be
used as the import data source.

=== Permissions

Administrator users can do just about anything. Manager users can read
almost all data on the system, but can only edit their own data or the
timesheets of other users (so they can make corrections or adjustments if
necessary). Restricted users can only read data that they have created, or
that they are given explicit permission to see. An administrator must edit
the user's account and add a task list to it, so that the user is able to
do things with that task list - in particular, they can't add task rows
to their timesheets unless the admin has given them permission to "see"
those tasks.

Users can make temporary, or permanently saved reports. These can be
marked as "shared", in which case other users can see them. For managers
and admins it makes little difference as they can read any report anyway,
but for restricted users, a report made by someone else is only visible
if it is marked as shared.

=== Timesheet committing

Timesheets are editable until committed, then they become frozen. This
leads to the notion of comitted versus non-committed hours in reports and
so forth. The idea is that at the end of a week, a user finishes editing
their timesheet and commits it using the relevant pop-up menu in the
timesheet editor. Thereafter, "history cannot be rewritten" - important if
you've used timesheet data in reports sent to clients.

For some workflows, you might want to commit less often, or you might find
that some users don't remember to commit timesheets when you expect them
to. Consequently, it's possible for admins to bulk commit timesheets that
lie between two given dates. Use the "Bulk timesheet commit" link on the
Home page control panel and follow the instructions provided.

=== Audit trail

Changes to "important" objects like customers or timesheets are recorded
in detail in the audit trail. Admins can examine this if they need to see
who modified something and when. It's unlikely that you will need it, but
should anything unexpectedly change in a way that might be a problem for a
report or client, you do at least have this fallback to help work out what
happened. Follow the "Raw audit data" link on the Home Page control panel.
